Update of the section 4, `Extensions to ObsCore Specific to High Energy Astrophysics Data` (#13)
ivoa/HighEnergyObsCoreExt: HighEnergyObsCoreExt.tex

\subsection{{\em energy\_min\/}/{\em energy\_max\/}}

> The existing attributes {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} that define the coverage of the spectral axis (defined as wavelength expressed in units of m) are not user friendly for \gls{HE} where datasets are generally selected according to an energy range ({\em i.e.\/}, inverse wavelength) in units of eV (or scaled units of eV, for example keV, MeV, GeV, TeV, PeV).  Unlike the radio domain where $\lambda = c/\nu$, where $c$ is an almost universally remembered physical constant, the conversion $\lambda = hc/E$ is not simple for the user to express.  As the spectral range covered by \gls{HE} data is many decades larger than for other wavebands, the accurate numerical representations of typical \gls{HE} spectral ranges as {\em em\_min\/}/{\em em\_max\/} requires quantities with many digits of precision and exponents ranging from $\sim\!10^{-5}$--$10^{-22}$.  Since specification of the spectral range is largely fundamental to data discovery in the \gls{HE} regime, we propose to add attributes {\em energy\_min\/} and {\em energy\_max\/} that specify the minimum and maximum spectral range values in units of eV\null.  Note that the sense of these attributes is {\em opposite\/} that of {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} because of the inverse wavelength relationship between energy and wavelength, so numerical comparisons must be transposed ({\em e.g.\/}, $E>E_{\rm thresh}$ becomes $\lambda<hc/E_{\rm thresh}$).  (An alternate approach would be to add attributes {\em em\_min\_energy\/} and {\em em\_max\_energy\/} that represent the energies corresponding to {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} in units of eV\null.  This is less desirable since queries on an energy would need to be specified as {\em em\_max\_energy\/}${}\leq E <{}${\em em\_min\_energy\/}, which is likely confusing.)

Reviewer: We had also discussed add standard functions to ADQL that do the conversion, like `WAVELENGTH_TO_ENERGY_EV(em.min)` to help the user in these cases?.  Should that be mentioned here as an alterative (or in addition to) this solution?   

From an implementation standpoint, we might also note that the `energy_min`, `energy_max` columns can also be generated  automatically by the database server, since they are just a simple mathematical transformation of the em_min/max columns, so adding these columns should not require re-ingesting data into existing databases.

\subsection{{\em obs\_mode}}

> Many \gls{HE} instruments may be configured using multiple observing modes and these observing modes may significantly impact the structure and characteristics ({\em e.g.\/}, calibration accuracy) of the resulting observation datasets.  We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf obs\_mode} that allows the data provider to specify the observation mode for an observation.  Constraints on observation mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination.  We note that permissible {\bf obs\_mode} values will vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.

Reviewer: I know `tracking_mode` is defined below, but with this very general definition, the tracking mode would work here. Maybe some specific examples would help? Is this supposed to be some aspect of the instrumental configuration?

Reviewer 2: > I know `tracking_mode` is defined below, but with this very general definition, the tracking mode would work here. Maybe some specific examples would help? Is this supposed to be some aspect of the instrumental configuration?

Well, this was requested by other folks so I assumed they would provide input.  However, I can give you an example from Chandra.  For the ACIS instrument, obs_mode = 'TIMED' produces 2D CCD images of detected events readout out at a user specified cadence (typically 3.2 s), whereas obs_mode = 'CONTINUOUS' continuously clocks the CCD readout so you effectively get a 1D image (with the other dimension collapsed along the readout direction).  However, continuous clocking allows the time response to be much faster (~2.85 ms per row).  The ability to select ACIS observations based on obs_mode would be very helpful.  obs_mode is both optional and facility-specific, so facilities can choose what are the most relevant quantities (if any) to make available for querying.

% Need more input/justification from facilities that support these capabilities

\subsection{{\em scan\_mode}}

> Some \gls{HE} facilities can obtain observations using different spatial scan modes ({\em e.g.\/}, target pointing, spatial scans [including raster scans], slew data, and so on) that will affect the content of the observation.  We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf scan\_mode} that allows the data provider to specify the scan mode for an observation.  Constraints on scan mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination.  We note that permissible {\bf scan\_mode} values may vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.

Reviewer: I'm not sure from reading this that I understand what `scan_mode` represents. Is it the way in which a region of interest is covered by observations? Maybe that is a better way to say it?  I think this is called "dithering" in optical astronomy, so if the concept is the same, we should mention that.

Author: I remove the scan mode. It is redundant

Reviewer 2: > I remove the scan mode. It is redundant

I really don't think this is the right thing to do.  We share tracking_mode and scan_mode with radio, and should converge the definitions.  We need to be broad in our thinking -- we're not trying to write a recommendation that just works for CTAO and Chandra, but can be generally used for all current and future facilities and datasets.

% Need more input/justification from facilities that support these capabilities

\subsection{{\em tracking\_mode}}

> Some \gls{HE} telescopes can obtain observations using different tracking modes ({\em e.g.\/}, sidereal rate, moving target [solar system] tracking, drift scans, and so on) that affect the content of the observation.  We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf tracking\_mode} that allows the data provider to specify the tracking mode for an observation.  Constraints on tracking mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination.  We note that permissible {\bf tracking\_mode} values may vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.

Reviewer: I think we should be a bit more rigorous here:

```suggestion
Since \gls{HE}  telescopes are  event-counting instruments, data can be accumulated even if the pointing moves or rotates relative to the sky during an observation.  However, they way in which this happens has an impact on how the data are later processed. Tracking is defined by ho  center of the field-of view \emph{tracks} during an observation: fixed to a celestial coordinate (the most common case for ground telescopes with movable mounts or those in space),  fixed to a horizontal coordinate (also called a "drift scan", and the standard case for telescopes without movable mounts),  fixed to a celestial body position like a planet or moon, or with no particular fixed coordinate system such as data taken when the instrument is slewing (\emph{i.e.} where the field of view moves with arbitrary direction and speed while the instrument is repositioning).   To distinguish these, we propose to add an optional attribute {\bf tracking\_mode}.  Constraints on tracking mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination.  We note that permissible {\bf tracking\_mode} values may vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.
```

% Need more input/justification from facilities that support these capabilities

\subsection{{\em analysis\_mode}}

> Some \gls{HE} instruments allow data to be reduced/analyzed in multiple ways and these analysis modes may significantly impact the content of the reduced datasets, as well as calibration accuracy. We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf analysis\_mode} that allows the data provider to specify the data reduction/analysis mode for an observation. Constraints on analysis mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination. We note that permissible {\bf analysis\_mode} values will vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.

Reviewer: I think we need to be more clear here that this is the processing/analysis done *to produce the data product*, and not related to analysis done by the user after.    So it's not really  "allowing the data to be processed", but describing how it was processed.   

```suggestion
Most \gls{HE} instruments employ significant software processing to transform raw data into the \emph{event-bundle} data exposed to users, including algorithms for calibration and event property reconstruction.  The way in which this processing is configured therefore has a potentially large impact the content of the reduced datasets;  indeed the same observation processed with two different configurations may result in different scientific performance. In some cases, multiple processing configurations within the same observation collection are used to provide users with a wider range of scientific coverage.   We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf analysis\_mode} that allows the data provider to specify the data reduction/analysis mode for an observation, in case more than one are employed. Constraints on analysis mode can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination. We note that permissible {\bf analysis\_mode} values will vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.
```

Reviewer: Should we mention that analysis_mode may produce data sets within one observation collection that are not statistically independent ? Or is that to much of a detail?  It might be useful to distinguish this from event_type, which is really the same thing, but where the results _are_ statistically independent.

Author: I propose to leave this aspect to the data release description made by a data provider .

% Need more input/justification from facilities that support these capabilities

\subsection{{\em event\_type}}

Some \gls{HE} instruments allow data to have event partitioning based on a data analyis quality associated with the reconstruction and the discrimination. Some analyses can flag each event by a quality label, partitionning the dataset into strictly disjoint event subsets. And for each quality label, a set of \glspl{IRF} should be derived and can be render public.  We propose to add an optional attribute {\bf event\_type} that specifies the data quality flag for an observation. It will allow the data provider to split the event list into several event lists labelled by an unique {\bf event\_type} for a given observation, and to distribute their associated \glspl{IRF}. Constraints on event type can provide a simple way to discover data sets for a specific facility/instrument combination and to reduce the downloaded data volume. We note that permissible {\bf event\_type} values will vary from facility to facility and from instrument to instrument.

> 

Reviewer: could add a footnote or reference to Fermi-LAT, which does this.

{\bf draws} & Draws & A dataset that records statistical draws computed from a probability distribution, for example Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) draws used when computing the Bayesian marginal probability density function for a random variable.& \cr
{\bf edisp} & Energy Dispersion & A dataset that records the probability density function for the energy migration as a function of true energy and spatial position.\footref{fn:dfgamma} & \#response-function, \#pdf \cr
{\bf event-bundle} & Event Bundle & An event-bundle dataset is a complex object containing an {\bf event-list} and multiple files or other substructures that are products necessary to analyze the {\bf event-list}. & \cr

> {\bf event-list} & Event list & A dataset containing a collection of observed events, such as incoming \gls{HE} particles, where an event is typically characterized by a spatial position, a time, and a spectral value ({\em e.g.\/}, an energy, a channel, a pulse height) & \#temporally-resolved-dataset \cr

Reviewer: > such as incoming particles

Is this really "such as"? Are there other cases? Maybe we can just say `collection of observed particle-detection events`.   Again, we have the long-standing ambiguity with VOEvent to contend with, so need to be very clear what kind of event we mean here.
